my name is tara needham i am the
assistant academic director at the
hannah arendt center for politics and
humanities at bard college
in the hudson valley of new york state
if you are
zooming in from afar and abroad
we are so thrilled to see so many people
logging on and logging in for this very
important conversation about debt and
finance capital
um
we're also thrilled to be co-sponsoring
this event with the museum of care and
with the economic democracy initiative
at bard college
you know when we were approached by mika
dubrovsky
we felt the words a real residence
between
what she described as the mission of the
museum of care
which projects
whose projects aim to create a public
space to discuss what dostoyevsky called
the cursed questions
what is power what is freedom value and
so on
the hannah rent center similarly
promotes bold and risky thinking
in the spirit of a rent and to aims to
create forums for the debate of ideas on
pressing topics of our time
there's no doubt that debt and finance
capital are such issues
that have immense bearing on
topics that were of great concern for a
rent democracy freedom the possibility
for spontaneity and political action
that said our participation is not to
suggest that a rent herself
would have or that the center
necessarily
agrees with or endorses all the views of
the panelists rather
our goal is again to invite and foster
lively debate and we hope that
participants
will respectfully challenge question and
clarify clarify the points of view
presented tonight
so it's now my great pleasure
um
to introduce niko dabroski who is an
artist and an author who grew up in the
unofficial cultural scenes of squats in
samidzat of the late ussr
she's written for many publications and
exhibited at among others the tel aviv
museum
galleria nova zagreb showroom london
fabrica moscow and apex art new york
she works on several publishing and
artistic projects including yes women
group art activist feminist community
and others
after her husband david graber's death
mika and friends organized carnival for
david which took place in 250 places
around the world
carnival for david evolved into the
informal community of the museum of care
which is creating projects like the one
tonight at the intersection of academia
activism and contemporary art so welcome
to nika our panelists and everyone
participating
so
thank you very much for hosting this
event
and
um
yeah the
the first
of uh the fight club between michael
hudson and thomas piketty was held on
the 10th anniversary of the edition of
david grabber's book 5000 years of death
i want to say that a lot has changed for
the better since then
the public discourse has shifted
now many people recognize that for what
it is structural violence
second the abstract that was created and
i'm especially happy that astra taylor
is with us today
astra is not only shares the ideas of
david
michael hudson and steve kim that all
deaths should be abolished but it strike
them is successfully buying out unfair
debts for example student medical debts
acting essentially in the same way as
abolitionists did freeing people from
that slavery
and i want to encourage everyone who
watches today to help them
i would like to announce our next fight
club that will be at house culture
develop in berlin the spring
with actors and activists david's
friends to perform an imaginary fight
between david greber and thomas hopps
and david greber versus jean-jacques
rousseau
starring
jacques servin of the yes man reverend
billy and salvatory d of the church of
stop shopping
this fight is a major point uh that was
explored in david's last book dawn of
everything that he wrote with an
archaeologist david fangrow
in the first fight club
the fight had so many rounds that we
didn't have time to answer questions
from the public so in the spirit of the
boxing match uh we are going to have our
combat michael hudson conduct a
post-match debrief
where the public can ask questions and
get answers
so meet steve kim michael hudson pavlina
cernova and astra taylor
who won last time
what do you think
[Applause]
we have a problem let's solve it
together
[Music]
the game is on
okay everyone
my name is astor taylor can you guys see
me or
okay great uh my name is ashley taylor
thank you so much for the kind
introduction nika and i just want to
reiterate thanking our hosts
the hanoran center and the museum of
care thanks for for having us um
and i i watched the first fight club
with great interest
uh noting the paradox between the terms
care and fighting so this will be
a loving debate um with a lot of i think
agreement among the participants but um
one thing we'll say is as an activist
and organizer working very hard on the
issues of debt cancellation
i am
constantly encountering critics and
criticism so i will do my best maybe to
channel some of the contrarianism that i
face when i share these ideas
so my name is astrid taylor i'll be i'll
be quick but just to set the stage uh
yeah my uh my my friend the lighting
great david graber
sort of
recruited me into uh what became a kind
of debt resistance movement he actually
invited me to the planning sessions of
occupy wall street
uh so this was back in 2011
and um
i was at that point a recently defaulted
student better
and
you know understood that my condition
was political but didn't have any people
to share that
that uh sense with certainly didn't have
the sense that the the wider world
shared my sense of injustice
uh and uh out of the ashes of occupy
wall street we started organizing around
debt based on the recognition that a lot
of people came to occupy were in debt
for education for health care
of course it was the mortgage crisis
that that it was the larger framework so
debt was everywhere once you started
looking at it and uh since then you know
david eventually went to the uk
i kept organizing with people and we
launched something called uh the debt
collective which is a union for letters
and
we have been organizing primarily around
the issue of student debt cancellation
though we though we also work on other
types of debt
for example some of our co-founders
planned the first protest demanding full
student debt cancellation and free
public college in 2012 marking one t day
the day student debt surpassed one
trillion dollars it's now 1.8 trillion
uh so ma in terms of pure math things
have gotten a lot worse but as nika said
rightly the discourse is much better
and partly because of the debt
collective we've unearthed the various
legal mechanisms by which it is actually
very possible for the government to
cancel student debt and we have forced
them to cancel
upwards of 10 billion dollars of student
debt just in 2021 alone
so debt cancellation is we've proven
it's a realistic demand it's a very
popular one i i just saw an ad for
stacey abrams who's running for governor
of georgia and she talks about medical
debt cancellation in her campaign ad so
i think that's another sign of the times
so i think um
you know i won't delay us but but we are
definitely in a in a moment where i
think the question is how can we keep
expanding the public imagination on this
issue how can we address some of the
doubts people have because not everybody
agrees and then yeah strategically what
do we do where is the power
and we have a great panels here to talk
about these issues and and to address
some of the common concerns you know
people are worried about the the deficit
right worried about the way that this
will affect uh there's a lot of
misapprehensions about how personal debt
and public debt relates hopefully we can
set some of those straight here
uh some of the questions that we can
return to according to the
materials circulated in advance
should student debt be cancelled i
already answered that yes and it can be
can the government run out of money what
is money what is debt
um so if people
i want to invite people to touch on
those points since that's what the
audience was told they'd hear about uh i
also want to invite people to use the q
a function
that is that is here we're going to also
address some of the questions from the
last century session as as they as nika
said they didn't get answered
so i'm going to briefly introduce our
panelists the esteemed michael hudson
who you know has been working on the
question of jubilee
for a long time and really is in many
ways inspiration for david's work for
the debt collective's work
really blaze an incredible trail talking
about the history and precedence and
philosophy of jubilee and more michael
hudson is president of the institute for
the study of long-term term economic
trends a wall street financial analyst
distinguished research professor of
economics at the university of missouri
kansas city
he is the author of and forgive them
their debts 2018
and j is for junk economics and i assume
there are many other books
steve keane is an australian economist
and author he's the author of debunking
economics and more recently the new
economics a manifesto
pavlina chernova is an associate
professor of economics at bard college
and a research scholar at the levy
economics institute she specializes in
modern monetary theory and public policy
uh public policy so a warm welcome to
all of you and i'm going to pass it over
to steve keane to
offer some thoughts on the last
fight club session and um maybe give us
some some brief thoughts on debt what is
it
why should it go
okay my sound is coming through
good all right okay um
the i'll start personal of all with the
thank you to thomas piketty who couldn't
join us for this session um it is very
rare for mainstream economists to engage
with critics like myself and and michael
and patlina uh so it's uh a tribute to
him that he was very generous with his
time and i thought also he's very
generous with his perspective in the
debate if i can characterize how thomas
would differ for myself and michael
thomas's recommendations at the end of
uh
his magnum opus capital were
fundamentally tax the rich
and the attitude which michael and
myself and uh have a concerning debt is
abolish the debt uh now of course
you think about what taxes and what
interest payments are and what profit
are they're all flows
they're flows of money per year that's
how they're denominated and what
taxation says well let's re let's take
some of that flow away from the rich and
direct it to the poor that is the
conventional attitude towards taxation
and i'm sure pavlina will get in here
and elaborate that tax doesn't actually
pay for anything when you take a look at
the modern monetary theory perspective
on how government money is created the
government creates money by running it
by running a deficit so government
spending creates money taxation destroys
money uh and it doesn't actually
contribute to anything it's the
government as one of the two primary
money creators in a capitalist economy
can create the money it needs for any
particular task it doesn't need to tax
so what then is the perspective on tax
from from this position it is
fundamentally that taxation decides
whose bank account goes down to reduce
the excess money created by government
spending
and what we know from the last 30 years
or so is the rich are
incredibly successful at making sure
it's not their accounts that get
affected so what what would be what we'd
be doing
with um
uh
with with taxation isn't doing what uh
is the perspective from uh
pickett's capital in the first place
and secondly the rich are very very good
at evading it uh now the point from
michael and i'm sure michael will
elaborate very effectively here on his
own behalf but what we see and this
comes out of my own mathematical
modeling i might add is that
debt increases the income of the rich
which is quite obvious it increases the
income of what we would call rontiers
but it actually in my mathematical
modeling of minsk's financial
instability hypothesis it actually
directly reduces the income share of the
workers
uh if i in my simple models which i'll
explain in the written manifesto
the debt is by money is in that model
model exclusively by the firm that's the
simplification i make to start the model
and i did not expect this outcome
but what happened was the profit rate
that capitals got the owners of the firm
vary around an equilibrium level as the
level of private debt went up the level
of income going to workers went down it
was a direct relationship and i explain
the causal mechanism in manifest so i
won't try to elaborate here
so fundamentally reducing the debt will
increase the share of income going to
workers
and it's and and on top of that we have
the modern monetary theory case
that the government doesn't need to
borrow an order to spend uh doesn't need
to tax to finance it so all the things
like student debt are a travesty when
you intellectually understand how money
is created i'll hand back to the other
panelists thank
you wonderful thanks for that i want to
hand it to pafflina uh to give her
perspective on debt and you know i i
wouldn't it's modern monetary theory is
really useful in this but you know one
thing we encounter over and over again
is this assumption people have and it's
because it's part of right-wing ideology
in their frame that you know the state
is like a household
you know they can run out of money you
got to tighten your belt and budget in
this limited way so maybe i think
commenting on that if you're inspired to
it would be great
yeah thank you uh thank you for the
invitation um
i
want to start with uh actually david
graber's comment on um
paradoxes that we have in our daily
lives how we have turned like
absurdities into like common sense what
people perceive to be is common sense
and this idea that the government must
behave as a household
and especially when it comes to its
financial affairs uh is one of those
paradoxes that we like we have created
such mythology and
you know just uh uh
culture of acceptance of of this um
basically flawed idea and it's all built
on a completely flawed understanding of
money on the history of money on the
origins of money and i will not go
through all of it now
but um just to say that even on the face
of it when we consider a very basic
simple reality that the currency in our
pockets
comes from one place and one place alone
and that comes from the public sector
just when we consider that basic
stylized fact
it can't possibly be true that the
government needs to get money from us to
pay for its expenses when it has the
ultimate means find issues the ultimate
means final means of payment
so
um
mmt really zeroes in on that under
theorized aspect of the monetary reality
there is private debt there is private
uh money creation of all at all levels
we use this hierarchical
model to describe it but the public
currency is under theorized
and so governments have had this
prerogative to issue their currencies
and and even in the old days to stamp
their gold coins they have had this
prerogative
and they must first provide the currency
before they can retrieve it back in the
form of tax payments or or bonds
purchase bond sales
and so what mmt basically stresses is
that the the causality is completely
upside down it's reversed
the issuer must provide the currency
before the users can use it to pay taxes
to purchase government securities so a
fundamental contribution from an mmt a
point of view is that a government is
self-financed but you must
also look at the kind of government
you're talking about we have so adopted
these mythologies that governments must
behave like households that we have
created these monetary systems in these
monetary regimes which artificially
constrain this very basic prerogative of
government and then we force the public
sector to behave like a household to tax
in order to pay so you know countries
that give up their own currencies that
dollarize that except or that that
actually inherit colonial currencies you
know they're fundamentally constrained
in in many ways in managing their
domestic economic affairs so um
the public sector we need to be looking
at what kind of
monetary regime we're looking at what
kind of institutional design we have
what kind of coordination we have
between our institutions to meet our
economic objectives so lesson number two
from mmt is that zeroing in on these
arbitrary ratios
debt to deficit debt to gdp deficit to
gdp ratio these are really uh red
herrings they divert our attention from
the important issues
how does the government spend on what
does it spend what kind of policies do
we as democratic polity demand of the
government and have we surrendered them
to this false ideology that the
government does not have money and that
it must uh pinch its pennies like a
household
i'll just pause here and we can carry
this further yeah so much to dig into
but michael would you like to weigh in
and respond to these comments and maybe
say anything you didn't get to say in
the last session before we go deeper
paulina's quite right when she says that
uh public debt is not the problem uh
private debt is a problem so i want to
pick up what uh steve keane said because
he was addressing the issue that kept
coming up uh in the debate and uh what
was the argument uh with picketing uh
piketty wanted to tax wealth to make
uh people more equal the problem is the
taxes leave the existing economic
structure in place so uh if you had if
you taxed the banks uh the debts would
still mount up you'd still have student
debt you'd still have foreclosures you'd
still have insolvency but uh the some
the rich would have to pay some of the
cost of impoverishing society to the
government uh which doesn't really need
it anyway
so i don't think that uh
taxes
address the problem that steve and i are
talking about that the economy has a
real structural problem and
from uh what david graber and i talked
about for years uh debt is what the 99
percent owed to the one percent most
people are in debt and most debts are
owed to one percent of the population
and paying this debt leaves less
disposable income for the debtors uh
less for students because if they pay
student debt they can't afford
to buy a mortgage to uh take a buy a
home uh homeowners i have to pay
mortgage debt uh and can't afford to buy
goods and services uh credit card
companies auto loans uh most of the
people who wanted to disagree with what
uh steve and i are saying about the need
uh to cancel this debt that is
bankrupting the economy is well isn't
that a choice it's a voluntary bargain
between uh uh borrowers and debtors why
do you want to interfere with the free
market and the voluntary bargain well
the bargain is your money or your life
you want a home or you want to be uh
sleep in the sidewalk oh you want a home
you got to go into debt uh do you want a
job well you're going to have to get a
degree get a degree you're going to have
to go into debt unless uh your parents
were bankers or had enough money uh to
put to put you through uh so most uh
most deaths throughout most of history
weren't voluntary they were arrears they
were uh cultivators on the land that uh
there was a crop failure there was a war
they couldn't pay the debts most debts
were just uh regular income that
couldn't be paid and uh the creditors
use the misfortune of society like the
covent crisis as an opportunity to make
money and uh you can see that here in
new york uh where uh we all are uh right
right now there are a lot of people that
have lost their jobs a lot of people uh
uh these people either are renters and
can't pay the rent or if they've bought
a home they can't pay the mortgage
there was a moratorium biden
said well we can't just throw all these
people out on the street let's have a
moratorium it expires in february in
february tens of thousands of new
yorkers are going to be evicted thrown
onto the street and uh their houses are
going to be uh put up for sale uh and
there are a lot of uh investment
companies just waiting to pick up uh all
of these houses so
that what steve and i are talking about
is debt is not in equilibrium debt grows
exponentially and it it uh ends up
engulfing the whole economy and that's
why uh you get to choose do you want to
keep the debts in place and let the
economy polarize and uh shrink or do you
want to write down the uh cred the
savings of the one percent that are
invested in loans to the 99
yeah well said one phrase from the debt
collective to get at this point you know
they're making your money your life is
we're not in debt because we live beyond
our means but because we're denied the
means to live and so i think it
i i'm sure people here you know
everybody agrees that debt debt
abolition abolitionist jubilee is
coupled with social provisions right
pavlina's written about jobs guarantee
right i mean the thing is this was the
old idea of a jubilee too debt
cancellation plus you'd get land back or
you know the means of the means of
survival um
but you're you're making a really
important point which is you know people
are basically and this is stuff we just
see at the deck like of every day in the
debtors we speak to who are desperate
sometimes suicidal
you know i mean this is
um this is such an urgent issue for so
many people
that you know makes people poorer but it
also you know makes people sicker and
there's a lot of evidence to back that
up
um but people are robbed twice right
they're underpaid at the job and then
forced to borrow to survive and this is
definitely a means of
wealth extraction it makes makes the
rich richer the poor poor
i another way to put this is that that
isn't just about money it's about power
and you all have hate on that um do
people want to say anyone feel inspired
to take that up right i mean this is
you know why do we have this system why
does it stay if we can point out all the
ways it's seemingly irrational and fair
you know why is it so entrenched and and
that's because this is this is power
it's not just a way to get money it also
keeps people under the thumb of
creditors and david graper was
not just a creditors but
um of employers
do people want to speak to that at all
the way debt is obstructs democracy
keeps people down
well it wasn't supposed to be that way
power that was uh the first deaths uh
anthropologically were uh the virgil
debts if you were in a primitive society
and you injured somebody uh
you have to pay reparations you have a
choice if you beat somebody up break his
arm or kill someone either your family
would feud with them and you'd all begin
fighting or you'd pay reparations uh the
whole idea of debt
the whole economy functioned on credit
long before there was money there was
credit uh if if you were a farmer in
mesopotamia in 3000 bc uh
you uh
get the cr what do you do during the
crop year
money was used one day a year
for the farmers in mesopotamia that's uh
when the harvest time came in uh on the
uh and the deaths that they owed for uh
the beer that they drank at the local uh
ale house and we have the records of the
ale house uh and for the uh food or for
the horses or for the water uh when you
go to the ale house you'd uh run up a
bill uh a tab just like today and it all
came due uh on at harvest time and
everything would be paid and uh that
worked except once in a while there was
a crop failure uh or there was a drought
and hamurabi would say if the people
can't pay the debt uh
we're going to cancel it because if they
can't pay the debt and they become a
slave of the ale lady do we really want
the cultivators all to
end up the debt servants in bondage uh
owing their crops to the lady and then
we're not going to be able to get them
to work on the
corvae work to build uh palace walls and
uh temples and big ditches and we're not
going to be able to uh get the uh crop
taxes uh from them so the whole idea
depth was supposed to be an equilibrium
and when it couldn't be paid every early
society wiped them out and all of that
uh
occurred until greece and rome it was
really rome that made debt a means of
getting uh getting labor into debt and
having to work off the debt on the land
of the uh
the creditor and uh
we're still living with the uh backwash
of roman law
and that that's the problem our legal
system uh is uh uh pro creditor and
this went against
every society that preceded rome and
that's become the legal system of
western civilization
yep really interesting yeah pavlin you
want to win i i love where uh michael
took this conversation
you know um
when we look at graber's book you know
debt is a social relationship and it
became monetized through time
but even early on there was this kind of
coercive relationship between
authority palace king and subjects and
that was the tax that's a debt that's a
sort of debt and that tax was always
there to to compel to force the
production of goods and resources to
provision the palace okay this is
unavoidable and that tax was used to
eventually you know kind of standardize
the unit of account how we pay these
debts and michael's work is very good um
in illustrating that when private
creditors gained so much power
over credit creation um then the
peasants were
obligated to the private creditors and
they were not as obligated to the state
in terms of delivering
corn and barley and grain to the palace
so the palace actually that weakened the
palace capability to do dead jubilees
because the palace could say i forgive
you your debts if you had a crop failure
you don't have to deliver the grain to
me but the private creditor would not do
that now why does the palace tax because
the palace not only needed to provision
for itself and you know again it's the
riches it's all power but also they did
build you know corvae labor was
infrastructure it was public work so
there was some semblance of kind of
public goods provisioning however
coercive that was
that is very much fast forward to the
present day that is very much the
function of the tax today the public
sector which issues its own currency
does not need to tax to collect the tax
to finance its public projects the
function of the tax is still for the
public to require the public's currency
to work in exchange to provision goods
and services and it is
you would you would you know one might
argue in a democratic sense our
expectation of the state is then to
provide public goods um that will
provision for the community as a whole
now what does this have to do with
student debt
well i mean student debt is one of those
debts that actually can be forgiven that
the vast majority of student debt is
held by the public sector it is there is
a small proportion that is held by
private you know you know privately
issued debt and not backed by government
guarantees but as we have said shown at
the leaving institute um it is uh
without major disruptions in fact to the
private sector which you probably want
to create disruptions you can cancel it
you can have a debt jubilee with student
debt um and so i think that broadly i
would think about taxes in this way that
they are you know certainly historically
a coercive mechanism they are certainly
a force that compels us to work
in exchange for money and now we and and
we have had you know uh you know
various campaigns about you know
taxation without representation which
presupposes certain democratic demand
right that we want the collective to do
something for all of us
but we need to kind of connect that to
theorizing what the money can do what
the public sector with the public
currency can do um if it is going to tax
and if it's going to attract resources
then it has a reciprocal obligation to
then
quote unquote provide for the good life
and this whole mythology that we can't
cancel the debts that somehow it's
inequitable for the rich kids to have
their debt cancelled along with many
other things are just um disempowering
narratives
that we can do x y and z
can i elaborate something that what uh
paulina just said she's absolutely she
pointed to the key point that uh the
reason that student debt can be
cancelled is its own to the government
not private banks so there's no lobbying
organization that's going to come in and
say uh you can't interfere with private
enterprise uh she began but earlier uh
she said that the uh the debt was the
power of the ruler uh over uh the
debtors uh that the people that the
rulers of mesopotamia really wanted
power over was that over the creditors
every early society stabilized itself by
preventing the emergence of a creditor
oligarchy and uh the uh over and over
again you'd see creditors getting rich
then all of a sudden they would
disappear from the record uh and uh the
idea is that uh all the way down through
the byzantine empire uh the rulers uh
would say we don't want a wealthy credit
or oligarchy because they're going to
use this labor as an army and they're
going to overthrow us and then they're
going to write all the laws and then we
won't get any more taxes uh they'll get
all of the money and they'll be the the
new king so uh the uh the look at uh
china for instance china is in the
position of uh
its uh economy that the us is to the
student veterans it's easy to write down
the debts if the debts are owed to
yourself that's why the mesopotamians
were able to write down the debts it's
because they were all owed to the palace
and the temples and they also would make
sure that the debts to the private
creditors uh were cancelled and they'd
move against the creditors so the key in
preserving democracy was to have what
president biden calls an autocracy an
autocracy is someone who says the public
interest is more important than the
interest of creditors
i think this really you know for me
coming from the decline there's a lot of
really interesting strategic questions
here because that is why we focused on
student debt precisely for this reason
because we know
we you know what it
the majority as you say is held by the
federal government
nevertheless the government was
pretending it didn't have the power to
cancel it so we had to throw that in its
face multiple times and you have made
headway there
and and you know if there are leverage
points against private creditors it's
that they're violating laws consumer
protection laws that they're engaging in
robo signing or shenanigans but we have
less we do have less leverage and i
think there's really there's some
strategic
major strategic challenges that are
being raised here steve would you like
to come in um and maybe uh
i don't know the standard you know
response to some of this talk is you
know but we need the creditors they're
they're productively investing capital
and if debts are abolished won't they go
on strike and not you know lend to
people
yeah i mean the the
important point i think we've i like the
way that we overtake and with kavlina as
well uh to talking about where this
originated because we go right back and
i'm i haven't yet yet i must admit uh
david graber's like the latest and last
book uh that's my reading on my flight
to australia on from on friday
but if you look at where this we already
began humans
built societies built on mutual
obligation and we'd actually do things
for each other it was actually
fundamentally a gift based society was
the the
really ancient basis of how humans
behave towards each other and that has
been perverted over time into what we
now call debt it first of all went
through the mesopotamian systems where
michael explained the role very well now
it's been taken over by the private
sector and what we have is i divide the
world into three major social classes
workers capitalists and bankers
and what has happened is the bankers are
the ones the financial sector are the
ones who've completely distorted that
original role of
the thing which makes us a human society
and that made it into a form of bondage
uh for part of that society but the
trouble is that bondage is described as
disguised by economic theory and if you
have any exposure to neoclassical
economics you would know of things like
what's called the medigliani miller uh
hypothesis that says it's actually uh
ultimately if you're paying interest at
all it's better that a corporation be
100 financed by debt
you get
the argument that the government has to
borrow off the public um
which really treats money as being
something like uh as my good friend
michael kumoff the only neo-facial
economist who understands money uh says
that it treats money like gravel that
has to be dug up and dumped in some
person's
storage system and then dolled out when
necessary there's a physical thing
rather than a sense of obligation uh
designed either between the public and
the government or the public and the
private bank sector so once we if we
realize that the
we have two major institutions to create
um to create money
governments are spending more than they
get back in taxation or banks lending
out more than they get back and
repayments the question is what ends of
those is that money used when we take a
look at the private sector uh the
financial sector has used economic
theory without knowing they're doing it
but use economic theory as a cover to
finance asset price inflation and to put
us in debt into into bondage for the
remainder of it it is not a creative use
of money at all uh
banks when after the great depression
which is the last time we had a serious
uh debt crisis that then led through
dramatic transition to society
bankers were under were
a despised class in the beginning of the
40s and 50s
and they were controlled their role was
to provide
investment finance for for industrial
capital
that back in those days the level of
private debt the the non-financial
sector's private debt was roughly 40
percent of gdp and most of that was
corporate there if you fast forward to
the financial crisis that rose to 170 of
gdp and it was predominantly household
debt and the large part of that
household debt was actually what gave us
the bubble in the in-house prices in the
first place you had a negative a
damaging feedback relationship between
debt asset prices and ultimately a
financial collapse so we have we need to
have a decent theory and mmt is part of
that theory the other part is minsky's
financial instability hypothesis they
are quite compatible with each other and
what they tell us is we should reduce
the level of private debt and if you do
that rather than taking money away from
the poor rich as well uh in what you do
is give more money to workers who spend
more so you actually get when i've
modeled a modern day jubilee you get a
boost in economic activity and
ultimately even the capitalists benefit
so this is one of those terrible cases
where ideology leads us into a trap that
makes everybody off but puts some people
in power over the poor
yes uh really interesting comments i'm
i'm here scanning some of the questions
from the last fight club and we have
actually answered a couple of them
um i mean one you just used the word
stabilizing one person asked
uh wouldn't
um wouldn't canceling debts be
destabilizing and you're actually saying
the opposite which i think the research
shows which it actually would be good
for terrorism in a kind of idealized
version of it where it actually wants to
share prosperity
uh yeah michael you're pointing about
canceling the debt and why it's stable
is you cancel savings on the other side
of the balance sheet
we're talking about debt but all this
debt is somebody else's savings and uh
the problem is that almost all the
savings in the economy are now owned by
the one percent that's why david
popularized the concept to one percent
and the best thing you can do uh if you
cancel the death to the one percent you
wipe out their savings and you take away
their dominance just like the 19th
century finally took away the power of
landlords that they had since feudal
times and that was what triggered in the
takeoff of industrial capitalism you
have to cancel this rontier
claims on society that uh the
creditor uh doesn't really play a
productive role he he collects interest
in asleep just like the landlord
collects interest in his sleep
landlords creditors rontiers monopolists
they do not play a productive role so
what do you destabilize you destabilize
the destabilizer
papalina did you ever thought yeah if i
can come back
okay
yes uh okay sorry i'll i'll go
yeah yeah okay finish steven i'll i'll
step in
i'm sorry okay um you know
what we if we did that i mean
that is the ideal let's get rid of the
power structure but of course the
instructions got the power so we would
lose that battle
inevitably so the proposal i've been
putting forward which actually uses the
concept of mmt as well is a modern debt
jubilee and that says look there are
there are two ways you can create money
the government can spend more than it
gets back in taxes the private banking
will then get back in in repayments now
if you use the government's power you
could actually give everybody an equal
amount of money and say if you have any
debt you must cancel that debt
so you create money which means that for
the for the for the uh creditor class
what they have is their loans disappear
but they get they get money in bank
account and step okay they get reserves
fundamentally so they don't actually end
up losing out but what it does is by
giving everybody the same amount of
money you give far more to the workers
than you give to the capitalists and
rontiers and by that green mechanism you
actually end up stimulating the economy
you can even set it up so that the bonds
interest paid on the bonds by the
government takes place of interest paid
on debt by the private sector and the
rentiers end up coming out getting the
sort of money that you submit the the
role of banking was described as the i
think the numbers are three six and
three uh borrowed three judge charge at
six and b on the golf course by 3 p.m
now that's where they bloody well belong
they don't long running running
washington in what i now call the
financial politico complex get them back
on the golf course where their
uselessness can be put to something
productive
well steve your proposal to bail out the
billionaires is very good for you
billionaires uh sitting there but uh the
fact is we really want to leave these
billionaires with all the money this
this debate came up with a civil war uh
when you wanted to get rid of slavery uh
people said well if abraham lincoln
cancels slavery he has to pay the slave
owners and lincoln said absolutely not
slave owning is wrong and we're not
going to create a new wealthy class to
dominate the country by paying them for
all the money that they've got from
slaves you don't want to bail out
to make the creditors hole come on uh uh
i don't have a billion dollars like you
but
i certainly might want to bail out these
passages
all
so pavlina i want you to respond to this
but i also want to throw you one more
question from the last session that i
think
and this person asked uh the main result
of quantitative easing appeared to be an
increase in the value of assets such as
share prices and housing i'm assuming
they're talking about you know early
2020 when covid hit
when the government bought a lot of bad
corporate debt steve mentioned corporate
debt so the person asked to what extent
are the central banks captured by the
interest of the richest in society and
what should be done about this
okay so that's exactly where i was going
to go with this conversation i mean dead
jubilees happen all the time you know
what did we do in 2008 you know the
government stepped in with extraordinary
budget and purchased enormous amount of
toxic financial assets it i i don't know
what else we can call it do you believe
not you know making these assets whole
um you know so it is it's a it's a type
of dead jubilee um what did we do during
covet you know we passed the economy uh
governments appropriated again budgets
that they had not uh appropriated in
post-war history in any crisis you know
japan i think it passed 56 percent of
gdp a budget overnight the united states
27 percent
that has to concentrate the mind
the government has enormous the
government has all the financial
resources that it needs
to grease the economic wheels to pause
student debt to pause moratorium on on
mortgage payments um on so it's just a
matter of choices um i would say that um
you know the tax system obviously
doesn't doesn't do this what we want to
do is simply eliminate extractive
services right we want to to eliminate
kind of unproductive predatory practices
you know unsustainable practices i think
that there is a way to certainly you
know pacify the rentier class by
replacing private debts with public
debts because those are default
risk-free and that's what we do
all the time and so i think for the debt
collective this is an argument to say
you have a public purse that is
regularly used for
these kinds of purposes to forgive debts
in the private sector we can certainly
deploy it for student debts
and i so so the question here is
um the state the government creates the
only default risk-free asset that's the
only one that can do this you know
europe is grappling with this you know
they have designed a system that they
cannot create a default risk risk-free
bond and they changed and broke their
own rules during the pandemic to make
sure that the european central bank
actually purchases these government
bonds to make sure that the bills are
paid and there's no question asked that
is the monetary reality and we just work
around it to kind of limit our policy
space so qe what was huey i mean qe was
a a way of basically you know ensuring
the positive value of something that is
essentially worthless some insurance on
some you know derivative that uh you
know the financial sector created just
to create financial return financial
profits there's no productive you know
uh value to this kind of activity we are
essentially validating the
financialization of the economy through
qe in order to uh
to prevent some sort of financial global
class collapse could we have done it
differently of course we could have made
companies whole we could have made
households whole we could have made big
industrial you know firms whole we
didn't have to necessarily to rescue the
financial sector which is the way we
went about this and so
i don't quite
believe that the qe is what fed an asset
bubble it definitely supported values of
assets that had no value the market
suddenly realized these are not worth
anything and so we supported those
assets it's that we permit the financial
sector to do what it does that feeds
this financial bubble and we don't have
the regulations i don't think interest
rates are going to do the job or
stopping qe will stop this kind of
speculative behavior so
is the banking sector captured
in many ways and one of the most
important ways is ideology is this this
belief this this deep belief that
somehow we have to manage our economic
affairs through this this construction
the private market rather than
acknowledge the powers that we have in
our public institutions and deploy them
i mean but part of the appeal of bond
financing things isn't just that
uh you know
rich investors get their payments but
that it's a way of circumventing
democratic deliberation too right that's
part of the benefits like oh well sorry
you know we we have to pay back the
bondholders so democracy goes out the
window right so there's all this value
added for
the one percent even that is such a
mythology like what is a bondholder
the bondholder is not financing the
government the government is providing
the bondholder an opportunity to earn
interest so it's completely upward
absolutely not a necessity
that's right we don't we don't need to
have i like to have treasuries in my
retirement portfolio okay it's the
default risk-free asset but uh it's not
for pacifying the bulk bond holders that
we need to be doing all this so we got
we're getting i'm just trying to bring
in the questions from the q a which
there's a lot of great stuff but uh
nicole brummer said the bailouts in the
crisis were like a jubilee but only for
the rich one percent so we're saying yes
indeed we could call these a kind of
jubilee how to make sure the jubilee
isn't stolen by the rich well we i mean
my
sense is we haven't figured that out
because we don't have enough counter
power debtors aren't organized creditors
are
um there's all this ideology we have to
debunk but curious if other people have
some thoughts about that
moving forward
so the next emergency isn't as
profitable
yeah i mean that i think that's a very
good point and that comes back to the
power structure talk of michael and i'm
having a difference of opinion over
there
uh because uh at the moment the power is
entirely uh
vested with the creditors and they
dominate how the government thinks as
well we need to break that nexus uh i i
would rather break it by a way that
actually shuts them up by stuffing money
in their mouth uh which is what they
seem to prefer to have to do
um rather than trying to decapitate them
because i've got a feeling that
at the moment um they have a more
powerful way of arguing than i have i
wouldn't like to see an abraham's track
uh abram's tank standing up outside my
house because my arguments were a debt
for a debt you believe um so
we we do have in the current situation
they will take over everything so if you
remember back when obama i was supposed
to be our progressive uh president um
there was is part of the proposal to
solve the cri the financial crisis was
an enormous amount of mortgage reset
that never happened what did happen with
that gigantic transfer from from uh from
what eventually became qe and just to
elaborate on pavlina to some extent uh
when qe takes place that is
fundamentally the central bank with an
unlimited capacity to literally
unlimited
getting reserves for for financial
institutions in return for
bonds now when they do that with banks
that are just an asset swap but the bank
can't do anything with that money but
when they buy them off non-bank
financial institutions which frankly are
owned by the banks then those are the
financial institutions end up with
reserves they can't get any investments
burn out of so they go and buy shares
so and all housing so in that sense the
sqe did directly boost house prices
through the purchases of bonds off the
non-bank financial sector
so there's lots of great questions here
here's a provocative one from one of our
hosts at the uh hannah rentz center um
if we abolish this is kind of utopian
begins with the utopian premise in a way
if we abolish taxes and abolish debt
it was gone
um and the government spends to provide
welfare and services don't we experience
incredible inflation is that sustainable
so that is from roger berkowitz
it's not
of course it's sustainable because right
now you have a choice either the banks
create credit and charge interest on it
or the government creates credit and
spends into the economy uh why is the
government money any more inflationary
than uh bank money the fact is that when
the government spends money into the
economy it's usually on infrastructure
on payments to people and the production
and consumption economy when banks lend
money uh create money they create it
just like uh the government prints money
but they created for people to bid up
the price of houses for people to take
over other corporations they buy to buy
assets not for goods and services so the
government creating uh this money that
banks are creating is actually much less
inflationary it will not increase the
price the cost of housing it will not uh
increase stocks and bonds it will just
be spent into the economy uh and
the fact that the government creates it
as opposed to somebody else is doesn't
mean a thing
i'm going to come back to michael have a
good argument here we've been at this
for a long time uh but i'm actually
going to point out that one of the
problems with this is that
if you look at the scale of government
spending back there for the first world
war it literally thought that in the
american economy
government spending was less than five
percent of gdp
now if you finance that by spending
without taxation that's not a problem
because you actually want your economy
to impact before we hit ecological
crisis which is another question i've
seen there before hit the ecological
limits you you wanted the money supply
to be growing by about at least five
percent per annum to enable commerce to
continue expanding in an expanding
economy but now when you when you go up
after the stage of big government which
occurred after the second the great
depression at the second world war
government spending is the order of 30
of gdp now if you injected 30 of udp
every year in the economy with money
that does not itself
and you would have runaway inflation so
the problem actually is not just that
the the creation of money the need for
taxation and so on it's the thing we
actually create
allegedly has a value which remains
constant and doesn't fall now
gazelle
keynes praised the monetary theorist
gazelle by saying gazelle's idea of
depreciating money was a very effective
idea that you could create money and if
you didn't use it it depreciated rapidly
and that was actually used in the town
of wargle during the second world during
during the
great depression to fight the the
collapse of the economy caused by the
credit system failing and wargle ended
up having full employment until they
were shut down by the austrian central
bank so it is actually fundamentally the
fact that money is set up so that it
shouldn't depreciate when in fact when
you look at an ecological sense and
a social sense maybe we should have
created a form of money to depreciate it
on its own and then you could have had
government spending whatever scale was
necessary and the money depreciating
over time without needing taxation to
cancel its excess create a creation
compared to the the scale of economic
activity in the economy
so
yeah go for it and then i have this
because i kind of agree with both
government spending is not inherently
inflationary but government spending
without taxation as steve keen is saying
is very large contribution to the
economy and tax taxes retrieve some of
this purchasing power but i would go
even further let's go back to the
history of money that that the role of
the tax is very important in the launch
of units of account and
uh of what you might call like you know
the
state money so what is the purpose of
the tax it is the the purpose is to
transfer resources to the public sector
and so if we abolish that
that has implications for the value of
the currency currently uh
you know without a doubt but also it has
implications for this transfer of
resources from the public private to the
public domain and so i'm very willing
and happy to entertain ideas of
collective provisioning but clearly the
tax serves this function of providing
some sort of resource to the public
sector which today we expect that will
be then
redistributed in a more equitable way
real resource not money
so i want to take us uh i want to take
us back to the ecological question that
came up in the last session in a minute
but first there's quite a few questions
actually here about student debt which
is what we advertised the panel to be
about i just want to read a couple of
them and i think i might be missing some
sorry
uh
uh uh nezla asks how is the national
student debt forgiveness program likely
to affect university enrollments
wouldn't it need to be paired with a
future solution such as free college is
that problematic i do want to say
you know and this is partly a david
graberism we actually reject the term
forgiveness which implies a that
the the borrower did something wrong
part of why we try to use
uh words like cancellation uh abolition
etc uh and then this ties another
question if i can find it related
there's a um
in dr graber's book jobs he had
proposed universal basic income as a
potential solution in reducing the
leverage and balance between workers
employers
could this be a potential solution to
reduce and eliminate student debt i
think
there were some others as well but
people want to speak on any of those
i'll just dive into the the
expending for education is one of the
classic cases in which the government
can spend money into the economy and not
have a bureaucrat decide how it gets
spent you give it to the students and
say you spend it and uh in that sense
it's almost the perfect means for
government money creation when one of
the replies about government money
creation is you don't want bureaucrats
deciding what to do you want consumers
and you want entrepreneurs well give it
to the students they'll spend they're
the consumers and it will turn up and
the entrepreneurs will try to make
make gain out of the student spending
and and that is a very creative way for
government spending to be undertaken and
the the travesty that's one reason i'm
delighted not to be in the university
sector anymore the travesty of what
student debts how students thought about
their education and how a bunch of
moronic uh
bureaucratic uh capitalists took over
universities and screwed them up
completely uh we'd be having a far
better university sector it was
completely government funded and the
entry requirements were not how much
money you borrowed but how many how many
brain cells you had and how well you
didn't examine how creative you were
that should be the barrier to getting
into universities and universities
should be run by the academic not run by
the bloody bureaucrats and the debt
financiers
there's a simpler way of explaining uh
this point all over most of the world
education is free uh and for most of the
world throughout history education has
been free it's a public utility just
like there is public health that's free
what is the there's no need to charge a
penny for education china doesn't pay uh
other countries uh have free education
america is unique in uh charging an
enormous amount of uh
for uh for education that should be a
free public utility
where you get there by as you say with
brains
yeah
and this is how i see universal basic
income you know uh this is a basic
income that is a guaranteed uh you know
free access to
you know what we consider to be the
basic essentials of life uh what is
social security it is an income
guarantee because we as society we have
decided that we don't want people to be
working in their old age um free public
education free um health care i think um
i think the i the idea here is to
rethink what the good life is and how we
can attain it
the idea that somehow a income grant
alone addresses these kind of deep
structural questions i think uh you know
i would challenge that i think that
basic income guarantees are essential uh
for many people who are not
participating in
in whatever we call a market economy but
we also want to think about the
structural aspects how we provide
this quality of life i can give you 30
a year and you cannot buy health
insurance rent and all the other things
on the market today
um wonderful i'm gonna actually
self-promote here and put a little
film in the uh chat that is called you
are not alone that i released earlier
this year that has some discussion of
what you know free pub we really need if
we're going to have couple student debt
cancellation with free public college we
have to make sure that it's abundant
that there are now so all sorts of you
can have you know a public good that
isn't offered at the scale that it's
needed and there can be other
inequalities that manifest in that so it
kind of gets into some of those deeper
questions and problems
um the ecology point uh because people
raised this in the last fight club i
think it's important you know where how
does this all hook into the problem of
growth
i mean i see two ways one is you know
debt and interest locks us into a model
of endless growth right the idea we're
gonna have more tomorrow than we have
today so we're pushed to exploit planet
and people more but then also when we
talk about that jubilee we often go
it'll boost the economy it'll be great
there will be growth
um
i don't know is that
is there a contradiction there uh how
does you know we're we're we're in an
ecological crisis let's talk about it
kevlina you want to go first you're on
camera yes sure happily i mean i i
turned to graber again you know uh the
the concept of the human economy that
you know everything is premised on on
care our entire existence is premised on
care it's not on an economy and an
economy this economy is a construct you
know it's a modern construct
but if we kind of really think deeply
about the human condition of what we do
even in a capitalist economy on our
daily life what we do is we take care of
our children of ourselves of our friends
we entertain each other we feed each
other we educate each other like the
vast majority of our work is actually
care work but we have just you know
commodified it in this particular way so
the the environment is this kind of
crucial dimension because it's
existential uh you know we can't quite
reproduce a society if we have
cannibalized you know the very basic
resources on which we vitally depend so
like you know for me it is like a
fundamental rethinking of what what is
work what the economy is doing what its
purpose is why do we have even this
market what is it supposed to deliver to
us and if it cannot why aren't we
delivering it in other ways it's it's a
kind of reimagining so the the climate
concern is i think you know the the
conversation is quite correct you know
growth cannot be a measure of success in
pretty much anything
um
and except you know the profit returns
and so with respect to these very large
existential questions um we need to be
thinking about the how to's and uh
you know technology not just purely
technical solutions but also the social
implications of these technical
solutions
i'm going to dive in with my other work
which is actually on climate change and
economics and
uh
i i have been
if there's only one thing that's
horrified me more about the thinking of
managing economists and how they treat
money it's how they've treated the
ecology uh the stuff which north house
got a nobel prize for is garbage that
should never have been published and
what's come after that is even even
worse uh the the ridiculousness they are
actually talking about the six degree
increase in temperature causing no more
than a ten percent fall in gdp as a
recent paper saying that if we lose
every major tipping point on the planet
gdp will be 1.4 percent lower than if we
didn't lose the amazon of the
gulf stream greenland the arctic west
antarctic it's ludicrous it's nonsense
it's garbage that means we're actually
on the cusp of gigantic ecological
crisis and the only way out of it i'm
afraid in my opinion is to it to finance
at the monetary side of this we have to
be spending on carbon rather than
spending on money so i'll put a set of
proposals together called carbon
rationing if you search for
carbonrationing.org you'll find those
ideas uh developed by a guy called adam
hardy uh in the first instance and the
idea there is that we'd have a parallel
of two tubes price systems uh you'd get
a universal carbon credit which you'd
have to spend as well as spending money
uh the universal carbon credit be given
out equally richard murdoch would get
the same carbon credit that michael
hudson got uh but of course michael
hudson would never exhaust his carbon
credit whereas rupert would run out in
half a minute and have to buy it off
michael and that would be a form of
redistribution of wealth as well as a
way of limiting the damage we do for the
carbon we're putting out into the into
the atmosphere
there is a particular relevance to
global warming uh and pollution to what
we're talking about debt uh think of the
economy of debt pollution the debt uh is
growing exponentially as steve has shown
uh and any rate of interest is a
doubling time uh think of all this
growth of debt this savings that uh
charges interest that's growing
exponentially this is like carbon into
the atmosphere the models are really
very similar and in both cases uh this
exponential growth stiffens stifles the
economy
and economists are responsible
mainstreaming economists but frankly
neoclassical economics has to go the
most dangerous thing for capitalism is
not these lefties here talking about
dead evolution it's near classical
economics avoiding the real issues in
capitalism
probably i mean wait they also ties back
into how we began this which is the the
public money could do a lot of things
like finance a green new deal right like
finance adjust transition that i mean
that i think is also the the debt logic
the ideology we're in prevents us from
saying hold on we have the money to
finance the transformation we need to
make sure everyone's taken care of right
like that is that's that's kind of the
core of
of it
um
i want to ask a question here just
because i think it's
uh something we're all hearing about
um
which is the inflation narrative um this
question is one of the first ones we got
um
as the inflation narrative is
increasingly being discussed in the
mainstream media as a phenomenon that
disproportionately punishes the poor
versus the rich well economic theory
recognizes that inflation
um
operates as a transfer of wealth from
savers to debtors what role might
inflation play in modern debt jubilee or
you know does this conversation give us
any tools to reject the the narrative
we're hearing about inflation right now
again pardon me jumping in quickly uh
inflation can actually be seen as an
accidental form of gazellian money
uh the inflation uh actually reduces the
debt burden if the if the money in
circulation is falling in value uh while
the uh actually if the inflation is
occurring it's actually reducing the
real value of debt
and that actually is a lubricating thing
for the global economy and since the
debt is mainly owned by the 99 cents of
the one percent i see that inflation
actually benefiting up to a certain
point not not a no hyperinflation
obviously but benefiting the poor at the
expense of the bridge and that's one
reason why the rich are so
anti-inflation so
i think in michael there's done plenty
of work on that issue as well so uh
inflation i would see it as so when it's
below hyperinflation levels it is
actually it actually benefits the poor
more than the rich
i mean i'll
step in here so inflation is one of
those other
mis-theorized
phenomena by by the profession that has
been used so effectively
to like justify all sorts of things like
we constantly use inflation as um not
providing enough support for the economy
or to make you know using unemployment
to fight inflation i mean that is just
like extraordinary feat of neoclassical
economics to say that working people
have to be the bulwark against inflation
there's no other phenomena that is like
supposed to be our defense against you
know the dark inflation so it's it's
just that there is just this mythology
that we can't achieve both full
employment price stability number two
inflation is used to uh constantly
disempower government spending because
the assumption is the government
spending is inherently inflationary
which we know it is not correct the
pandemic bears it out we spend a third
of the economy in one year and we see
all the inflation coming in from the
private sector from bottlenecks from
supply chains from from logistical
problems from shutting down various
sectors in the economy globally and on
top of it this is very well exploited by
firms we just saw today the bloomberg
article that the first giant
corporations in the united states are
posting record profits since the 50s
they're exploiting this kind of partly
media fueled fear of inflation a
customer has resigned themselves that
this is inevitable they're not going to
run away from their um from the firm but
also their monopsonists like where are
we gonna go and buy our stuff when we
have this huge concentration of power
and so they're using the pricing power
that they have to be able to extract
profit margins that are far higher i
think inflation is definitely concerning
to people and that can be a
destabilizing social force and you want
to mind you know how you know what
happens to to folks purchasing power how
they perceive this but there are ways to
deal with this that are not um you know
sacrificing uh growth in employment uh
well-being etc finally
what if there is inflation are we going
to let the planet burn i do like this to
me that doesn't even make sense like we
we cannot wait
we can't like structure the right
commercial return or wait for the right
inflation or get the right private
interest to do the job we have public
money we have a crisis we need to
mobilize it immediately and we need to
deal with it then we tackle inflation
there are ways you know
to deal with structuring i think there
are examples of just you know
structurally dealing with inflation
around the world but uh
i'll stop here
yeah
there's a really um
sorry we're a little all over the place
but that's that's that's a live chat
here i think this one is it was is
important though all around the world
rising housing prices are locking out
first-time buyers or forcing them to
take out enormous mortgages
will a debt jubilee on mortgages affect
housing affordability uh you know and
not everyone can take out a mortgage
right that's forcing a lot of people to
be renters but it is striking that we
have historically low mortgage rates you
know uh they really went down after the
pandemic you know when you see mortgage
rates of 2.85 or 3 you sure don't see
that on credit cards or payday loans or
other kinds of consumer debt um so it
feels like there's lots of interesting
things to talk about uh this and and um
uh
someone who who feels inspired to take
it um and i'm also hearing resonances of
michael's comments about the rent the
victim moratorium's ending and i think
it's important underscore that yes
people have had eviction more terms but
that rent has been piling up
right it wasn't
a cancellation of people's rent so some
estimates are saying people owe 50
billion 70 billion dollars of back rent
um there's not michael go for it
you're muted michael
animate yourself
it has to be said now can you hear me
okay this question came up in the third
century bc in sparta
the king decided that uh the spartans
were so much in debt he was going to
cancel the debts uh and uh
one of his relatives uh his uncle
actually convinced them only cancel the
mortgage debt well it turns out to
cancel the mortgage debts who had the
mortgages the the rich people if you
cancel the mortgage debts donald trump
will be the richest man in the country
the most commercial property owners have
um one percent or a tenth of a percent
of their capital it's all debt you would
be giving the biggest giveaway of wealth
in american history to the large
commercial uh in uh mortgage uh uh
property owners that all of a sudden
wouldn't have to pay the banks at all so
the last thing you want to do
is to give it away there is a way around
this you would have to if you are going
to cancel the debts on mortgage you want
to make sure that the government gets
all of that rental value that you're
just giving away to the uh to the
absentee owners by uh a property tax
which is uh
what what china's doing uh look at what
happened in russia russia could have got
back all of the mineral wealth and the
housing that uh we also gave away simply
by taxing away all of the revenue from
what it gave away so if you do cancel
the mortgages you'd have to replace it
with a with a full taxation uh so that
you don't give a free lunch to the most
heavily indebted people the rich own
most of the debts the rich are the
biggest debtors and you don't want to
forgive the debts of the rich you want
to forget the debts that people like
also
and that's then that's why i talk in
terms of the modern debt you believe
mate rather than the old traditional one
because i if i modeled this in in
manifesto you would have a modern day
jubilee which would give you one hundred
thousand dollars per person to repay
your debts and therefore rupert murdoch
would have your debt for by a hundred
thousand dollars and pavlina would have
a debt fall by a hundred thousand
dollars i think rupert would know that
rather less than papalina so the idea is
to do this at an equal level an equal
footing create the money is the
government's capacity to do that and
therefore it dramatically reduces the
debt of the poor and in fact the poor
could end up being
net positive uh while the rich still
have those debts they don't get out of
it so we have to think intelligently
about how to do this and also i saw one
question there about the housing issue
uh getting rid of the mortgage
alone with the mortgage of the poor
rather than the rich um
you would still have the capacity for
this for the banking sector to recreate
debt and get us back in an asset bubble
again and empirical research and my own
modeling shows that what actually causes
rising house prices is rising levels of
new mortgage debt so the way to stop
that is to say and this is again it
means a political shift as well to
achieve it is to say that banks can no
longer lend as much as they like for a
house they can then say for example no
more than 10 times the annual rental
income for a house now that would remove
the
amplifying feedback that currently
exists between new mortgages and house
prices get rid of that and and therefore
you get rid of what's actually causing
the bubbles in the first place
that's exactly what happened in 1960s
when i came to new york that's how
things work uh banks would not lend uh
to anyone uh where the debt service uh
was more than 25 of their income and now
it's
everything's been removed you're
absolutely right this is how to do it
the three of us are all talking about
the economy as a system not separating
uh debt in one part from another and
cutting it apart we're looking at the
overall system and that's not what uh uh
neoclassical economics does
papalena do you have thoughts on this or
should we move on
no yeah i mean i think just like we talk
about a student that jubilee coupled
with free public college we there's a
problem with how
we approach housing we have to approach
our housing as a speculative asset
instead of something that we live in and
so there's all sorts of forms of social
housing and other ways to provide for
that human uh need so as we as we get
towards the end i want to start asking
questions that maybe uh are even even a
bit pushed the envelope a bit further so
i want to mix two one from
um uh
one from chad elsin he asked how much
power are we willing to give to the
government to manage our lives by giving
it the control of the financial water we
swim in i want to combine that with a
question from nika that i just have to
find
nika
um
our wonderful uh co-host asks uh so the
cat so
um
so the capital is power you say that the
state
or the palace is obviously better than
private creditors i'm interested in
whether a situation with more democratic
distribution of power is possible or in
other words what would a society look
like where wealth is not automatically
converted to power
so both of these
kind of loop us back to some of the
original questions about the creditor
being the state or the private sector
and
add some wrinkles
i think that's i think that's a very
both very good questions framing uh the
one of the strongest arguments people
make against government money as that'll
let bureaucrats control what happens
rather than letting the public rather
than letting private entrepreneurs
control it
in the university sector and seeing the
amount of money wasted by bureaucratic
initiatives there i'm sympathetic to
part of that argument so we do have to
consider how do we stop uh
people who's
letting a subset of society control the
rest of society and that again is why
things like spending on infrastructure
on education uh on health uh by the
government over the government funds
those entirely uh removes that issue you
decide how much of your economy should
be spent in education how much should be
spent on health the government provides
that money and then that money goes out
through the professionals who decide how
it should be spent and the individuals
receive it they also decide how that
money is spent so we don't have to get
caught up in the situation where a bunch
of bureaucrats make stupid rules uh that
waste money and so on and of course at
the same time i'm going to come back as
they have a lot of very gifted
bureaucrats and we need to get back to
the stage where we can see people in the
public sector being there for public
service reasons we need to get that that
ideology back into place and part of the
nonsense buchanan has given us where we
always regard bureaucrats as bad but out
of that we've actually had a lot of bad
bureaucrats and we need to reform the
government side of things almost as much
as the private money system
so i would answer this um to say that uh
it's not so much that the state per se
is the issue but the way the state is
governed and captured right and so which
would be the disempowering narratives
that we want to tackle head on for mmt
it's very clear taxes do not pay for
government spending that immediately
disempowers the wealthy class we don't
need the taxes of the rich we don't need
them to fund our policy priorities
because we have institutions that are
perfectly capable to fund what we desire
and so you see this dichotomy of people
supporting uh you know universal
healthcare education etc but they are
kind of surrendering to this ideology
that we all we can't do this because we
need to find the pay for that is the one
gridlock that we see play out over and
over and over again across the globe and
we need to remove this tool from the
conversation from people's like you know
like understanding about money we do not
depend on tax says to fund um these
public priorities i also then
i am thinking about various wages in
which society organizes itself right
because we try together to to fill gaps
where the state has not contributed
right if we don't have universal health
care we have solidarity economy if we
don't have and we certainly can't expect
that there will be a bureaucrat that can
come into my community and say well you
should do this this and this like the
community knows like their environmental
needs care needs this is where my own
work comes in that you can actually
deploy you can actually effectively do
ground up support these networks
solidarity networks endless variety of
communities associations you name it
that can that are already doing the kind
of care work that we've been talking
about but they are disconnected from
this like uh important source of finance
and they're captured in the ideology
that they need private credit or some
tax from somewhere so i would you know i
would actually bring these these two
um to chain the paradigm the parents
give the footnote to what you said
paulina nobody has ever said uh you have
to pay as you go when it comes to
military spending
somehow nobody's ever said where are we
going to get the money they only say it
when it comes to spending into the
economy that you and i are talking about
the people yeah well it's good to tax
the rich too they don't have so much
money to buy the political influence
they have which
you know absolutely this is this is
absolutely and i think you know i would
go back to the initial conversation you
know i mean how high a tax do we do we
need and the the concentration of wealth
is so high that taxing income is not
going to do the job you know do it 90
okay we've done it before but it's just
not going to disrupt these other
processes by which wealth is
accumulating and so you need to think
structurally about just removing these
opportunities to make money like that
would be my preference of restructuring
the economy um and then you know yes you
should tax certain activities out of
existence you know but i wouldn't even
say tax you just ban
you know a certain kind of extraction
you know maybe you know predatory
practices you know regulatory tools can
be used for that
well somebody here asked you know are we
avoiding the p word for planning it
sounds that this is dt cochrane uh it
sounds like we need to
uh need planning to direct spending
investment rather than leaving it to the
market if so aren't we saying that if
not how else do we get where we want and
need to go i mean i i guess i would also
just underscore another theme here which
has been the way
these debt relationships
uh uh
again circumvent or override democratic
deliberation and democratic planning um
you know by saying oh
again the bonds the credit rating agency
says this we can't do that it's off the
table um but what do you think about
planning michael you look like every
economy is planned our america is the
most centrally planned we're more
centrally planned to china but the
central planning is done by wall street
not by the government every of course uh
it's it's centrally planned the question
is who's going to do the planning ever
since the uh the neolithic you had to
plan for the crops you had to plan to
allocate resources the government has
left the planning to the uh to the
financial sector and the financial
sector lives in the short run
governments are supposed to live in the
long term so we're talking about uh
short-term people
looking at what they can grab in the
next three months of the year uh and
what uh steve keane's model and i are
talking about or the long-term uh which
is uh the public point of view
pavlina
yeah i mean you know institutionalists
this is a kind of a starting point for
institutionalist economic theory that
you know uh planning is always there the
question is who does the planning you
know in the earl roaring 20s is the
cartels and the trust and then it was
the corporate sector um we have always
had planning minsky's work which is kind
of you know evolutionary
institutionalist financial theory you
know he argues that there was a short
period of time where we had um kind of a
managerial economy where the public
sector took the larger role of public
investment directing public investment
employment that was right around world
war ii and soon thereafter but then we
quickly liberalized and then we had
planning by the financial sector as
michael uh pointed out so that i think
that you know it's a dirty word but i
think it's absolutely unavoidable if you
just look a little closely more closely
at just the institutional structure and
the evolution of the economy and you
know there are questions we have to ask
going forward you know how we tackle
climate uh responses and if if our
insistence is that we're going to have
some you know private um you know mega
corporations through incentives and
nudges that they will do the planning i
think we are definitely abdicating our
democratic responsibility um uh yeah so
i want to close this out with a really
simple and elegant question and maybe we
can channel david graber a bit who had
some
um but
they asked would the abolition of debt
also abolish borrowing
right um
or are we always borrowing each other
and owing things is it something else
that's a problem but yeah maybe uh
pavlina begin with you and then we'll go
to steve and then michael and we'll
close up
i think that the question has certain
premise that maybe i'm i'm not super
comfortable with because you know for me
uh in the graveyard sense right money is
connected to debt but that is not social
obligation and that's not something that
we can kind of cancel and abolish we
have this kind of you know a sense of
reciprocation to one another and however
we trace the history of those
relationships money has been there and
so money uh to me represents that i know
what i think the question is asking that
we are having this you know dependence
on privately created private debt and i
think that that you know requires
restructuring but can you stop me from
giving you a loan i don't know if that
is a possibility the question is like
what do we do with that
i i think we've taken the current
circumstances we're in of a debt cri of
a
ecological crisis coming our way
then we have to in that situation we
have to fundamentally redefine money now
if we think about the question about
planning beforehand uh largely near
classical economics and mainstream
capitalist ideologies to let the
entrepreneurs let the business people
decide how to plan they'll get it right
but that was true wouldn't be facing an
ecological crisis uh they are short-term
thinkers we do need the long-term and
the government is normally the
repository that long-term thinking the
trouble is of course their interests
have been captured by the financial
class and we've that's that's why we've
delayed action on climate change for 50
years now if we have to redefine money
in the context of an ecological crisis
then most of the money has to be created
in response to our ecological needs and
that's where i my idea of a of a
parallel carbon
currency and universal carbon credits
would be part of that to limit what we
spend because country we've spent too
much we as
the human society on this planet takes
out far too much of them
well
regarding debt cancellation its
resources and that is actually
undermining us and destroying our
capacities
regarding debt cancellation when i began
my uh uh harvard group on the history of
debt in the 1990s uh the argument by
archeology by the right-wing uh
archaeologists and anthropologists was
you couldn't possibly cancel the debts
in uh uh in mesopotamia because who
would ever lend money well obviously as
soon as they canceled the debts it all
began as paulina said all began all over
again and uh so then the uh people uh
the uh right-wingers said you see it
didn't work canceling doesn't work it
begins all over again well of course it
begins all over again it does work in
wiping out the overhead of death and
then the whole thing will begin all over
again until society lets too much debt
accumulate and when too much debt
accumulates then you turn on the therm
the debt thermostat and you wipe it out
and that happened again and again
uh with every new ruler in the bronze
age in mesopotamia uh also all
throughout antiquity uh so that's just a
false argument that uh these people not
only don't read history they try to
prevent uh anthropological history from
being read or or published
just because it's ideologically against
their uh right-wing pro-creditor
arguments
thank you all we're definitely seeing a
war on history these days um uh so you
know we know from history the debt
cancellation debt jubilee is possible
but i fully believe we need to build
better power to get there so please join
the debt collective um get organized our
slogan one of our many slogans is you
are not alone a space l-o-a-n one thing
that does is it isolates us
uh you know there's stigma there's shame
so a first step is overcoming that and
banding with others i'm gonna pass the
mic to tara from the hanaren center so
thanks all for being here
um on behalf of the hannah aren't center
and
all of our co-sponsors nika the museum
of care pavlina and economic democracy
initiative um
i want to just thank everybody for this
fascinating
excellent relevant topical discussion
and um pavlina steve
michael astra thank you for your
tremendous moderating and
um
i hope that you all stay in contact with
our organizations including astr's debt
collective
the hannah rent center you can google us
find us at bard.edu see more of our
events um we have active youtube
channels and i know nika there is there
are more fight clubs coming up and it
sounds like this conversation is still
just getting started that's that's my
my feeling um that we could still keep
going so
and thank you most of all to our
audience for staying engaged posing such
great questions and um really pushing
this conversation where it needed to go
okay everyone thank you again
good night
bye
ah
that was fantastic very very good
conversation all around yeah i didn't
mean to give you about being a
billionaire just